
# Estimating Direct and Indirect Treatment Effects in Space-Time Dependent CRTs

This Github page provides code and data for reproducing the results in the manuscript:``Estimating Direct and Indirect Treatment Effects and Ranking Treatment Regimens in Space-Time Dependent Cluster Randomized Trials: A Schistosomiasis Case Study'' by Y. Chen, X. Wen, F. Luo, Y. Yang, and Y. Shen. 

## Datasets of Schistosomiasis from SCORE Project
Schistosomiasis, a neglected tropical parasitic disease, is prevalent in Africa, South America, and Asia − especially in rural areas with poor socioeconomic conditions (Hong et al., 2022) − with cases reported in more than 70 countries (World Health Organization, 2022).  In 2021 alone, at least 251 million people required preventive treatment (World Health Organization, 2023). Global efforts to control morbidity have primarily focused on preventive chemotherapy using praziquantel (PZQ), typically delivered through Mass Drug Administration (MDA) via School-Based Treatment (SBT) or Community-Wide Treatment (CWT). To systematically evaluate and compare the two treatment strategies, the Schistosomiasis Consortium for Operational Research and Evaluation (SCORE; \citet{SCORE}) conducted a five-year cluster randomized trial (CRT) across multiple countries \citep{ezeamama2016gaining, shen2017protocol}. This data can be download via [SCORE](https://clinepidb.org/ce/app/workspace/analyses/DS_d6a1141fbf/new).
- We analyze infection prevalence data on Schistosoma mansoni from 149 villages in Kenya and 149 villages in Tanzania, covering a wide age range from 5 to 77 years.
- These infection data, collected on a yearly scale, were obtained through the SCORE project over a 5-year period from 2011 to 2015
- This project involves a Cluster Randomized Trials (CRTs) with six arms
- Each arm received one of three treatment options (SBT, CWT, or no treatment) annually from the first to the fourth year

## Our methodology
Motivated by the need to identify optimal treatment regimens in the Schistosomiasis Consortium for Operational Research and Evaluation CRT, this study addresses the methodological challenges introduced by sequential treatments and spatiotemporal dependencies. We identify optimal treatment regimens by evaluating differences through two components: DEs from the most recent treatment and IEs from historical treatment trajectories. To efficiently estimate DEs and IEs, we develop a Joint Spatiotemporal Varying Coefficient (JSTVC) model. JSTVC accounts for spatiotemporal dependencies and regional heterogeneities, while also capturing spatial anisotropic patterns associated with schistosomiasis transmission. To support scalable inference under complex dependent structures, we extend a hybrid computational method that integrates Variational Bayes with ensemble-based techniques (See R file for detailed code). The proposed methodology provides a broadly applicable framework for modeling complex dependencies in randomized experiments, especially in those involving multiple sequential interventions.
